In previous videos in this course,
I've discussed the class structure,
with the exception of fields, methods, and constructors.
In this video, I will talk more about
fields declared in a class
and accessing them when instances of the class are created.
I have talked about static and non-static fields
in previous videos
and we've learnt that they are assigned default values,
whereas local variables aren't.
All right, so you can create the following
types of fields in a class in Java:
Static fields, also known as class variables.
Only one bucket or area for a static field
will ever exist
and this place holder will be associated
with the class and not the objects of that type.
This contrasts to non-static fields,
also known as instance variables,
where every instantiated object
has it's own place holder or area
for that data.
Final fields.
Both class and instance variables,
static and non-static fields, in other words,
can be declared final.
The final field can be declared
with no assigned value.
Blank, in other words.
But, only only is an associated initializer sets it.
A blank class variable requires a static initializer
of the class, to set the variable in which it's declared.
Otherwise, a compile time error occurs.
Now, a blank final instance variable
must have a value at the end of every constructor
of the class in which it's declared,
otherwise a compile-time error occurs.
Transient fields.
Well, these are fields
that won't get serialised or persisted,
another type of field in Java.
Then, we've got volatile fields.
The Java Memory Model ensures, in this scenario,
that all threads see a consistent value
for variables declared volatile.
And, as a recap, we learned previously
that fields, class or instance fields,
are initialised to the following default values:
Boolean fields default to false.
Primitive numeric fields default
to a representation of zero appropriate for that type.
And, any object reference defaults to null.
Final fields are not initialised to default values
and must be set in an initialization statement of some sort.
Once set, final field values cannot be changed.
All right, so before we move on to code examples
in the next video,
let's review the this keyword.
So, this is a keyword in Java,
which has the following meanings:
this is a reference variable
and you can assign it to other reference variables,
but you cannot assign any other value to this,
including null.
this is a qualifier that can be used to access
any instance variables on the current objects.
And, it's considered best practise to use
this. when accessing instance variables
in Java.
The this() is a call to the current object's
no args constructor.
And, if you have defined other constructors
for that class,
you can call the appropriate constructor
using the this method name,
not the constructor name,
and the appropriate parameters
that match with the constructor
you were trying to call.
All right, so let's have a look at some valid uses
of the this keyword before even.
Now, look at some invalid uses.
Firstly, to access attributes in a non-static method
on the current instance.
I've got an example there returning this.name
in what is traditionally a GetA method.
So, that's one valid use.
In a constructor, you can call another constructor
and the example there is this().
That would call the no-argument constructor
in this case.
And, going into more detail about that,
in constructors, we've got a class Test defined here
and you can see I'm calling this().
And, that's valid here in this constructor,
which is a constructor that takes one argument,
but it's calling the constructor with no arguments.
And it's valid because it's the first statement
in a constructor.
Further on down, you can see another use
for this there.
And, we're setting an instance variable,
in this case name to the value of Jane.
So, moving on down,
in initializers,
in a very similar example there,
initializer code this.name = Jane,
very similar or identical to what we just did previously.
Now, you can also assign a variable to this,
as in Object o = this.
And, finally, you can return it from a parameter.
So, we've got an example here in a method
Object returnObject return this,
and that would return this as an Object.
All right, let's now look at some
invalid uses of this.
First, you cannot access instance attributes
using this in static methods.
The example there, the static void modifyName,
so we've define a static method modifyName,
this.name = this.name + abc, for example.
That would fail because you can't access
an instance attribute in a static method.
Now, another invalid use of this is in a constructor,
calling an additional constructor in the wrong place
because it needs to be the first
and only the first statement.
And, in an example on the right-hand side there,
this has been called as the second statement
and we'll get a compile-time error.
You also can't use this in static initalizers,
as in this.name = Jane.
Again, that's for static initializers,
as opposed to regular initializers.
And, finally you cannot set the value of this,
as in this = null or this = myObject.
Because, obviously, Java assigns
the value of this automatically,
when the class is instantiated.
All right, so let's finish the video here
and in the next one,
we'll walk through some examples
of what we've been talking about in code.
See you in the next video.